feat: Add memory behavior to Knowledge Boxes (#274)
nuclia/nuclia.py: docs/15-memory.md

# NucliaMemory

`NucliaMemory` is a high-level SDK component that turns any Nuclia Knowledge Box into a **personalised, multi-user memory store**. It lets you:

- Organise knowledge into **topics** (discrete memory domains backed by KB resources).
- Attach **entries** (annotated observations, decisions, or notes) to topics on behalf of specific users.
- Automatically extract distilled **facts** and a **knowledge graph** from each entry via a background data-augmentation task.
- **Recall** grounded, personalised answers for any user without mixing up other users' context.

All examples assume you have [authenticated](02-auth.md) and set a [default Knowledge Box](03-kb.md).

## Core Concepts

| Concept | Description |
|---------|-------------|
| **Topic** | A named memory domain stored as a KB resource. It can contain reference documents (policy text, guidelines, etc.) and collects the entries of all users. |

> | **Entry** | A timestamped annotation written by a user for a topic. It records a decision, observation, or note together with optional `reasoning`, `context` messages, and structured `metadata`. |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| **Entry** | A timestamped text entry belonging to a topic. It records any content to be remembered. For example, decisions, observations, or conversation transcripts. It may also contain optional `reasoning`, `context` messages, and structured `metadata`. |
```

> | **Fact** | A short, distilled statement automatically extracted from an entry by the memory data-augmentation task. Facts act as a compressed, searchable index of entries. |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| **Fact** | A short, distilled statement automatically extracted from an entry by the Memory data augmentation task. Facts act as a compressed, searchable index of entries. |
```

| **Graph** | An entity–relation graph extracted from both the topic's reference content and a user's entries, giving a personalised knowledge graph view. |
| **Global entry** | An entry not tied to any specific topic. Stored under a per-user resource. Useful for cross-topic or agent-level memory. |

---

## Initializing Memory

Before using `NucliaMemory` you must call `initialize()` once per Knowledge Box. This registers the background task that extracts facts and knowledge graphs from new entries.

```python
from nuclia.sdk.memory import NucliaMemory

memory = NucliaMemory()
memory.initialize()
```

### Parameters

| Parameter | Type | Default | Description |
|-----------|------|---------|-------------|

> | `rules` | `list[str] \| None` | `None` | Custom rules for the fact-extraction task (e.g. formatting constraints, entity requirements). |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| `rules` | `list[str] \| None` | `None` | Custom rules for the fact-extraction task (e.g. formatting constraints, additional context, restrictions). |
```

> | `graph_extraction` | `bool \| None` | `True` | Whether to extract a knowledge graph from entries. |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| `graph_extraction` | `bool \| None` | `True` | Whether to extract a knowledge graph from the generated facts. |
```

| `entity_defs` | `list[EntityDefinition] \| None` | `None` | Custom entity type definitions for the graph extractor. |
| `examples` | `list[GraphExtractionExample] \| None` | `None` | Few-shot examples to guide graph extraction. |
| `llm_config` | `LLMConfig \| None` | `None` | Override the LLM used for extraction. |
| `overwrite` | `bool` | `False` | If `True`, replace an existing task configuration with the new one. |

```python
from nuclia_models.worker.proto import LLMConfig
from nuclia.sdk.memory import NucliaMemory

> memory = NucliaMemory()
> memory.initialize(
>     rules=[
>         "Facts must be self-contained and reference the employee ID where available.",
>         "Do not include personal opinions — only verifiable actions and decisions.",
>     ],
>     graph_extraction=True,
>     overwrite=False,

Reviewer: Adding an LLM override as well
```suggestion
memory.initialize(
    rules=[
        "Facts must be self-contained and reference the employee ID where available.",
        "Do not include personal opinions — only verifiable actions and decisions.",
    ],
    graph_extraction=True,
    llm_config=LLMConfig(generative_model="claude-4-6-sonnet")
    overwrite=False,
```

```python
edges = memory.graph(topic="vacation-policy", user_id="alice-hr")
for edge in edges:
    print(
        f"{edge.source.value!r} --{edge.relation.label}--> {edge.destination.value!r}"
    )
```

#### CLI

```bash
nuclia memory graph --topic=vacation-policy --user_id=alice-hr
```

---

## Querying Memory

### Semantic retrieval (`recall`)

Returns a ranked list of relevant context blocks without generating an answer. Useful when you want to feed context into your own LLM pipeline.

```python
blocks = memory.recall(
    question="Has anyone ever approved a carry-over exception?",
    topic="vacation-policy",
    user_id="alice-hr",
    top_k=10,
)

for block in blocks:
    print(f"[score={block.score:.3f}] {block.text[:120]}")
```

**Returns:** `list[RelevantContextBlock]`

| Field | Type | Description |
|-------|------|-------------|
| `id` | `str` | Paragraph identifier. |
| `text` | `str` | Text of the retrieved block. |
| `score` | `float` | Relevance score. |

#### CLI

```bash
nuclia memory recall \
  --question="Has anyone approved a carry-over exception?" \
  --topic=vacation-policy \
  --user_id=alice-hr
```

---

### Generative answer (`ask`)

> Returns a grounded, personalised answer generated by an LLM over the topic and user's facts. This is the primary entry point for building memory-powered assistants.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Returns a grounded, personalised answer generated by an LLM over the topic and user's facts. This is the primary entry point for building memory-powered assistants.

Internally it builds a request to the `/ask` endpoint with a filter to only retrieve memories relevant to the provided user and topic
```

        ),
        topic="vacation-policy",
        user_id="bob-hr",
        entry_id="bob-entry-001",
        reasoning="No business-critical event; policy should be applied as written.",
        context=[
            EntryContextMessage(author="Leo", text="I forgot to use 6 vacation days. Can I carry them over?"),
        ],
        metadata={"employee_id": "EMP-5512", "decision": "denied", "days": 6},
    )
except EntryAlreadyExistsError:
    pass

# ── 5. Ask the same question for Alice and Bob ────────────────────────────────

question = "Have you ever approved a carry-over exception, and if so, under what conditions?"

for user_id, name in [("alice-hr", "Alice"), ("bob-hr", "Bob")]:
    result = memory.ask(query=question, topic="vacation-policy", user_id=user_id)
    print(f"\n[{name}] {result.answer}")
```

Expected output (paraphrased):
- **Alice**: *"Yes, you approved an 8-day carry-over exception for Maria (EMP-1042) because she could not take leave during the Q4 product launch."*
- **Bob**: *"No, you denied a carry-over exception for Leo (EMP-5512) as he had adequate time to schedule vacation during the year."*

---

> ## Complete Example: Agent Memory

Reviewer: What do you think about changing this one for the conversational one? That way we showcase that entry!=annotation and that entries themselves can hold raw data (chats in that case)

# NucliaMemory

`NucliaMemory` is a high-level SDK component that turns any Nuclia Knowledge Box into a **personalised, multi-user memory store**. It lets you:

- Organise knowledge into **topics** (discrete memory domains backed by KB resources).
- Attach **entries** (annotated observations, decisions, or notes) to topics on behalf of specific users.

> - Automatically extract distilled **facts** and a **knowledge graph** from each entry via a background data-augmentation task.

Reviewer 2: this seems to suggest that a knowledge graph is etracted for each entry
